Enhance docs with GitBook (#398)
src-d/lookout: docs/architecture.md

# source{d} lookout Architecture

_You will find the project background, goals, constraints, solution details and other info in [**source{d} lookout DesignDoc**](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pqz-_SHO5BsJE-aa8o_bAY3r5vR67amnWN8-qZc2UgY/edit#)_

> ![lookout service sequence diagram](assets/lookout-seq-diagram.png)

Reviewer: I don't like this diagram at all, to be honest. This one was in the docs at some point, then we removed it. Well, we moved it to a `.md` file that was not linked from anywhere, but should have been deleted.

I propose to replace it with this other one: [link](https://mermaidjs.github.io/mermaid-live-editor/#/edit/eyJjb2RlIjoic2VxdWVuY2VEaWFncmFtXG4gICAgcGFydGljaXBhbnQgR2l0SHViXG4gICAgcGFydGljaXBhbnQgbG9va291dFxuICAgIHBhcnRpY2lwYW50IEFuYWx5emVyXG4gICAgcGFydGljaXBhbnQgQmFiZWxmaXNoXG4gICAgbG9va291dC0-PkdpdEh1YjogUG9sbGluZ1xuICAgIEdpdEh1Yi0tPj5sb29rb3V0OiBQUi9QdXNoIGV2ZW50c1xuICAgIGxvb2tvdXQtPj5BbmFseXplcjogTm90aWZ5UmV2aWV3RXZlbnRcbiAgICBBbmFseXplci0-Pmxvb2tvdXQ6IEdldENoYW5nZXMvR2V0RmlsZXNcbiAgICBsb29rb3V0LT4-QmFiZWxmaXNoOiBwYXJzZUZpbGUgKGlmIFdhbnRVQVNUKVxuICAgIEJhYmVsZmlzaC0tPj5sb29rb3V0OiBVQVNUXG4gICAgbG9va291dC0tPj5BbmFseXplcjogQ2hhbmdlL0ZpbGVcbiAgICBBbmFseXplci0tPj5sb29rb3V0OiBDb21tZW50c1xuICAgIGxvb2tvdXQtPj5HaXRIdWI6IFBvc3QgY29tbWVudHMiLCJtZXJtYWlkIjp7InRoZW1lIjoiZGVmYXVsdCJ9fQ).

In my opinion, this one is overly-complicated. The goal of this diagram should be to provide a simple overview of the different components and how they interact with each other.
- What is that healthcheck loop exactly? And how is that relevant for an overview of the architecture?
- The registered repos/registered analyzers boxes add noise, without any added value
- DataServer is shown as a component. While this might be useful to describe the internals of the `lookoutd` code, from an architecture point of view this adds confusion. `Analyzer` could also be divided into `Analyzer gRPC Server`, `Analyzer` and `DataServer gRPC client`; but that would be just unnecesary noise. I think separating `lookout` and `DataServer` is in a similar category, too low-level for a diagram.

Reviewer: About
> boxes are loop according to the label they have, meaning that something happens for every repo and every analyzer... because those events are not being processed by different lookout instances, but for the same one.
 
The boxes are correct, and I don't find them not misleading in any way. My feedback here is that visually it makes the diagram too busy, making it harder to understand things at a glance.

In this diagram I would say less is more. Saying that we poll GitHub for the registered repos is implied, just like we don't need to say that we'll use the configured credentials to poll GitHub. Or that we'll do that periodically in a loop; I think that's also imiplied.

Author: done by a178a5028745b566f4b013e29b668649805b754a

Lookout consists of the following components:

## Server

It is the main component, running in a separate process.
It is responsible for orchestrating all the other services.
It takes review requests made by an external code review system, calls the registered analyzers to review the changes, and posts the results back.

> ## lookout DataService

Reviewer: For the same reasoning as above, I would not consider `DataService` a component. I would simply explain this as one of the things that the lookout server does.

This is a personal opinion on what is a _component_. But from an architecture point of view, I would stop at `lookout`.

For someone that deploys lookout, an analyzer needs to call the `lookoutd` component, using the `DataService` gRPC service definition. For the same reason we have the `lookout` component contact GitHub, and not a separate `github provider`, or `go-github` component.

Author: I also found that "DataService" is part of the API that the user is using, so it's may worth to explain who's attending their requests and how is that related to Lookout.
In a further iteration, DataService could be even physically separated, and this info would be still meaningful.

Author: addressed by 3484af7

The [ChangesRequest](https://github.com/src-d/lookout-sdk/blob/master/proto/lookout/sdk/service_data.proto#L58) or [FilesRequest](https://github.com/src-d/lookout-sdk/blob/master/proto/lookout/sdk/service_data.proto#L69) can be configured the to ask either for all files, or just the changed ones, as well as UASTs, language, full file content and/or exclude some paths: by regexp, or just all [vendored paths](https://github.com/github/linguist/blob/master/lib/linguist/vendor.yml).

## Analyzer

_Find more info about what an analyzer is and how to develop your own analyzer in the [**source{d} lookout Analyzers** documentation](analyzers.md)_

An analyzer is a gRPC service that will be called by the [Server](#server) to perform the smart code analysis, and it will return a set of `Comments` as the result of the analysis.

They are not part of **lookout** repository so they can be developed by third parties.

> Lookout Server will call all the Analyzers that were already registered when it was started.

Reviewer: I don't know why exactly but this sentence sounds a bit off. What about
```suggestion
Lookout Server will call all the Analyzers to produce comments for a new Pull Request. To register new Analyzers in the configuration file, lookout will need to be restarted.
```

# SDK

The [lookout-sdk](https://github.com/src-d/lookout-sdk) repository is a toolkit for writing new analyzers. It contains:
- `.proto` interface definitions for all **lookout** gRPC services.

> - The pre-generated code in Go and Python that provides an easy access to the **lookout DataService** gRPC service; and low-level helpers to workaround some protobuf/gRPC caveats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The pre-generated code in Go and Python that provides an easy access to the **lookout DataService** gRPC service; and low-level helpers to work around some protobuf/gRPC caveats.
```
